====================================
**About the School of Learning**
====================================

In order to promote value-based education, research and training, the
University has established eight schools of studies, which are:

1. School of Management

2. School of Information and Communication Technology (ICT)

3. School of Biotechnology

4. School of Engineering

5. School of Vocational Studies & Applied sciences

6. School of Humanities & Social Sciences

7. School of Buddhist Studies & Civilization

8. School of Law, Justice & Governance

Each School of studies in the University combines a multilateral
confluence of academic training, research, innovation and creativity.
The Schools are embodiments of the University’s ever-growing quest for
excellence in higher education and research. All the Schools are in
synchrony with the essence of our predominant Buddhist Ethics and
Practices in the modern context. All the Schools encompass modern fields
of studies, high-end technological exposure and a meaningful
dissemination of knowledge coupled with practicing wisdom. The
uniqueness of the University is acknowledged through the format, content
and pedagogy of its programmes and their relevance to the society.

The Schools of Studies were established with the objectives to
disseminate knowledge by providing instructional and research facilities
in such branches of learning as it may deem fit; to make special
provisions for integrated courses in Management, Engineering,
Biotechnology and ICT in its educational programmes; to take appropriate
measures for promoting innovations in teaching-learning process and
inter-disciplinary studies and research; to educate and train manpower
for the development of the country and to establish linkages with
industries for the promotion of science and technology; and to pay
special attention to the improvement of the social and economic
conditions and welfare of the people, their intellectual, academic and
cultural development.

.. image:: image028.jpg

The academic programmes offered by the University have been recognized
by the UGC and by various regulatory bodies /Statutory Councils,
whichever are applicable in individual cases viz.

-  **Recognized by the University Grants Commission of India (UGC);**
   vide F.9-18/2009 (CRP-I) dated 13 May 2009 under section 2(f) of UGC
   Act 1956.

-  **Association of Indian Universities Membership;** vide
   Meet/84-AM/2009/289139-73.

-  **Approved by the Bar Council of India:** The School of Law, Justice
   & Governance (SoLJ&G) offers a five years Integrated BA, LLB
   programme; vide BCI:D:2074/2014 (LE/Afflin) on 03.12.2014.

-  **Approved by Rehabilitation Council of India (RCI):** The Department
   of Psychology & Mental Health, School of Humanities & Social Sciences
   offers M. Phil. (Clinical Psychology), 2 years Programme; vide
   17-785/M. Phil. (Cl. Psy.)/14/RCI dated 07 July 2014 for session
   2014-15. However for the current academic session it is under
   process.

-  **Approved by the Council of Architecture, India:** The Department of
   Architect & Planning, School of Engineering offers 5 years Integrated
   Dual Degree Programme (B. Arch. + M. Arch./MBA) in Architect and
   Planning Programme; vide CA/5/Academic-UP35 dated 03 September 2012.

-  **ISO 9001: 2008 Certification of the University** accredited jointly
   by Joint Accreditation System of Australia & New Zealand (JAS-ANZ);
   vide 1015QBC26 issued on 21 February 2015.

**2.1 SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT**
-----------------------------

The School of Management (SOM) has been marching on with an integrated
focus on exploring and creating new avenues for all passionate aspirants
by strategic collaborations with institutions & Individuals, and the
enterprises of national and international repute. The School has already
shown commitment to internalize the quality standards indicated by the
credible bodies. The School has leveraged the flexibility in the
curriculum design to mold it according to the fast changing regional and
global context. It has been offering some unique courses and programmes,
which has been quite popular among students and industry. The five years
programme makes possible to cater pool of electives in the areas of
Finance, Marketing etc along with multiple summer training opportunities
with foreign language during the programme. The School has state of the
art classrooms equipped with computing and multimedia facilities and
supported by an extensive library of books, journals, films & databases.
The curriculum of all its academic activities has international and
cross cultural focus. The School offers specialization in HRM,
Marketing, Finance, Operations, Information Technology and Strategy etc.
GBU SOM promotes diversity in MBA class by inculcating students from
different other Schools of the University, thus encouraging
multi-disciplinary learning.

-  **Laboratories:**

    Computer Labs, Professional Development Lab & Communication Lab

**2.2 SCHOOL OF INFORMATION & COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY**
--------------------------------------------------------

The School of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) has been
progressing towards excellence in the field of technical education and
research. The School aims to produce competent professionals having
strong sense of social responsibilities and become a hub of research and
development activities of national and international recognition. The
academic programmes, are designed in line with the best Universities
around the world, and combine the best practices of pedagogy and class
room teaching, complemented by practical training and experiential
learning.

-  **Laboratories:**

    Computer Lab-1, Computer Lab-2 Computer Lab-3 (Windows Operating
    Systems), Basic Electronics Laboratory, Electronic Circuits Lab,
    Logic Design Lab, Artificial Intelligence & Robotics Lab, Wireless
    Technologies Lab, Optical Communication Lab, Analog Communication
    Lab, VLSI Design Lab, DSP Lab, Microprocessor and interfacing Lab,
    Microwave & Antenna Lab, Electronics Workshop, Computer Networking
    Lab, Expert System Lab, Multimedia Technology Lab, Parallel
    Processing Lab, Advance Digital Communication Lab, Research and
    Projects Lab, Open Source Software Lab, Embedded System, Image
    Processing Lab and Computer Vision Lab.

.. image:: image029.jpg

**2.3 SCHOOL OF BIOTECHNOLOGY**
-------------------------------

Biotechnology is largely considered as the applied science of the
21\ :sup:`st` century. Biotechnology sector is one of the fastest
growing knowledge-based sectors in India. With numerous comparative
advantages in terms of research and development (R&D) facilities, pool
of human capital and cost advantage, the biotechnology industry in India
has immense potential to emerge as a global key player. The main
objective of the School is to improve the education of present and
potential workforce in Biotechnology and to bring innovative products
for the social good of the globe. The vision of the School is to achieve
multi-layer excellence at regional/national and global level in the
field of new solutions and manpower development. The School is dedicated
to provide quality service through teamwork, partnerships and developing
research spirit for the professional strength of community and
individual. The faculty members of the School can clearly be
distinguished in terms of proven academic engagement, diverse
backgrounds, sponsored research (funded by DBT, DST, ICMR, CSIR, etc.)
and its impact. The School is an active centre of basic and applied
research. The School of Biotechnology has organized a number of
Seminars, Conferences, Workshops and Awareness Programmes through the
regular lectures by the Expert Faculty and the eminent Guest Lecturers.

-  **Laboratories:**

    Advance Plant and Animal Tissue Culture Lab, Molecular Biology Lab,
    Microbiology Lab, Bioprocess and Fermentation Lab, Genomics and
    Proteomics Lab, Environmental Biotechnology Lab, Advanced Central
    Instrumentation facility and Bioinformatics Lab for post graduate
    and doctoral students.

.. image:: image031.png

**2.4 SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING**
------------------------------

The School of Engineering has earned recognition for its commitment to
excellence from its inception. School of Engineering has become an
example of the best in class faculty members, students, competency and
discipline. The School has upheld commitment to the liberal skills and
aptitudes in all their breadth and depth. The School of Engineering
encourages students to expand their talents and skills not only in
technical education but also in career enhancement and personality
building too. The School also offers numerous leadership opportunities
with various technical and professional augmentation establishments viz.
the SAE-GBU Collegiate club, GBU-IEEE Student Chapter. A strong
technical core forms the foundation for a wealth of integrated master's
degree programs offered through SOE. The School is enriched by Civil
Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering and
Architecture & Regional Planning departments.

-  **Laboratories:**

-  *Civil Engineering & Architecture:* Engineering Graphics Lab,
   Material Testing Lab, Fluid Mechanics Lab, Surveying Lab I&II,
   Environmental Engineering Lab, Advance Environmental Engineering Lab,
   Concrete Lab, Soil Mechanics Lab, Transportation Lab, CAD lab, Remote
   sensing and GIS lab.

-  *Electrical Engineering:* Electrical Technology Lab, Electrical
   Machine Lab, MATLAB Programming Lab, Power Systems lab, Switch Gear
   and Protection Lab, Measurement and Instrumentation Lab, Network
   Theory Lab, Power Electronics & Drives Lab, Control System Lab,
   Bio-Medical and Virtual Instrumentation Lab, digital and non linear
   control Lab. **Upcoming Labs:** Advance Power Electronics and Drive
   Lab, Advance Instrumentation and Control Lab.

-  *Mechanical Engineering:* Engineering Workshop, Fluid Mechanics,
   Fluids Machines, Automobile lab, Machine Dynamics Lab\ **.**
   Manufacturing Technology Lab, Air-conditioning & Refrigeration Lab,
   Vibration Lab. **Upcoming Labs:** Meteorology and Instrumentation
   Lab, Advance Manufacturing Lab-I &II, Advance Design Lab-I &II,
   Computational Fluid Dynamics Lab, Heat and Mass transfer Lab, Advance
   thermal Engineering Lab

**2.5 SCHOOL OF VOCATIONAL STUDIES & APPLIED SCIENCES**
-------------------------------------------------------

The School of Vocational Studies & Applied Sciences (SoVSAS) comprises
of primary disciplines of Chemistry, Mathematics and Physics along with
two inter disciplinary subjects, Environmental Science, and Food
Processing & Technology. All academic programmes of the School lay
emphasize on the integration of the existing theoretical knowledge with
practical applications. The School, through its academic and research
staff, possesses a huge depth and breadth of scientific & technological
knowledge. The integrated approach of the School prepares a strong
foundation for the future scientists capable of making new discoveries.
Drawing together individual expertise and diverse ideas from a variety
of fields we enthuse scholars to go for innovative research. The School
is successfully running postgraduate and doctoral programmes since 2011.
These academic programmes support specialized interdisciplinary fields
of teaching, research and industry engagement in polymer chemistry,
green chemistry, pharmaceutical chemistry, environmental science, food
technology, Photonics & optoelectronics, semi conductor- optoelectronics
devices, plasmonics thin films, nanotechnology, computational fluid
dynamics & Applied Mathematics. Apart from these courses, the School is
all set to offer a wide range of vocational courses of short duration to
increase opportunities and human expertise in varied fields of the
professional world. School of Vocational Studies and Applied Sciences
has been very active in conducting workshops, and organizing national
and international conferences and seminars.

-  **Laboratories:**

    Apart from basic laboratories for undergraduate engineering and
    science students, the School has advanced labs in all the
    disciplines for postgraduate / doctoral students.

**2.6 SCHOOL OF HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCES**
----------------------------------------------

The School of Humanities and Social Sciences is interdisciplinary in
approach. It plays the pivotal role of exposing the students to an
environment that is conducive to develop understanding of contemporary
social issues through inter-relationship of science, technology and
management. The School has a unique and distinctive role of hosting
creative educational programmes that focus on creating holistic
understanding of complexities of life in social context with emphasis on
Indian cultural values and Buddhist ethics. The School is committed to
provide an interdisciplinary and integrative pedagogical interface to
learners so as to nurture them into competent human beings. The academic
programmes, designed in line with the best Universities around the
world, combine the best practices of pedagogy and class room teaching,
complemented by practical training and experiential learning. The School
encourages research and focuses on providing its students with an
atmosphere for rigorous academic and intellectual development. For the
fulfillment of its teaching and research goals, the School has competent
faculty members who keep pace with the current developments in their
fields of specialization.

-  **Laboratories:**

-  *Clinical Psychology Laboratory & OPD Services*: Mental Health
   Clinic, Child and Adolescent Clinic, Neuro-psychological Clinic,
   Mental Retardation and Development Pathology Clinic, De-addiction
   Clinic and Psychosexual Clinic, on specific week-days.

-  *Social Work Lab:* Social Work Practice Learning Laboratory

**2.7 SCHOOL OF BUDDHIST STUDIES & CIVILIZATION**
-------------------------------------------------

The School of Buddhist Studies & Civilization has been established with
a vision to produce the erudite scholars and distinguished researchers
in the field of Buddhist Studies, in order to develop and cater their
knowledge to serve the humanity. The School adopts interdisciplinary and
multidimensional approaches with the help of other sciences and social
sciences like Archaeology, History, and Philosophy etc. for producing
scientific researches. The School is well supported by talented and
innovative faculty members, who are striving hard to establish the
School as an institution of repute with their pioneer researches,
conference participations, and academic endeavours. Their commitment for
the School is to encourage scientific inquiry and inquisitiveness among
the students as well as academicians. The School offers various academic
programmes at Graduate, Post-Graduate and Doctoral level including BA,
MA, M. Phil, and Ph. D. From the year (2014) the School has started five
year integrated course of B. A. (Hons.) - MA in Buddhist Studies and
Civilization programme for the first time in India. These flagship
programmes are aimed to train the students to inculcate their expertise
and vision for socio-economic, religious, and political development of
the World. Our vision is to establish the School of Buddhist Studies and
Civilization, Gautam Buddha University as a major research Centre of the
world. Keeping pace with the disciplinary advances, the programme would
address learning about ethical, psychological, historical,
philosophical, economic, transnational, trans-cultural, and linguistic
expertise at individual, social, national, and international level. It
would facilitate acquisition of specialized knowledge in Buddhist
History, Philosophy, and Literature existing in Pali, Sanskrit, Chinese,
Burmese, Sinhalese and Tibetan languages and their literature.

The course shall allow students in specialized domains of Buddhist
Studies, along with quest for personal growth and citizenship. The
objective of the programme is to create strong research oriented
foundation in consonance with the recent advances in the field of
Buddhist Studies to enable young/budding researchers/scholars to adopt
an ethical approach to the programme that combines conceptual and
representative practices in both quantitative and qualitative tradition.
The programme would provide an opportunity to extend the knowledge and
practices with a view to promote healthy interface between academics and
society. With a very rich library, a grand meditation centre, a serene
campus, the School promises a very productive academic engagement and
practice of Buddhist techniques of *Vipassana* meditation under
qualified supervision. In addition to the above, the School provides an
ideal forum for cross-cultural and international dialogues, with regular
sessions with scholars, conventions, symposia, seminars, conferences,
lecture series, etc. It is open to academic collaborations, joint
research programmes and faculty & student exchange programmes with
academic institutions of repute dedicated to Buddhist Studies. The
School has a MoUs with Dhammachai International Research Institute
(DIRI), based in New Zealand in June 2013 and MIMC, Leh, Ladakh in 2015.

.. image:: image034.jpg

**2.8 SCHOOL OF LAW, JUSTICE & GOVERNANCE**
-------------------------------------------

Gautam Buddha University-which has been legislatively conceived as “a
centre of excellence”-has started its ambitious multidisciplinary
academic programme with the establishment of its School of Law, Justice
& Governance in 2011. The School envisions to foster advancement of
learning, teaching and research in the fields of law, justice and
governance. The main academic programme of the School, the five-year
integrated BA LLB, has been running since July 2012. With enrollment of
students in the same programme in the academic session 2015-16, the
School is treading ahead at fairly good pace. The ongoing programme of
the School attempts to strike a right balance between the compulsory
subjects prescribed by the Bar Council of India and subjects
underscoring the interface between Law, Justice and Governance.

The School aims to blend the theoretical knowledge with practical
learning and development of skills and professional attitude through
clinical legal education. Keeping this object in mind, the students are
guided to participate in moot-court practice, debate, essay writing and
project works. With this, the School also aims to provide an opportunity
to the students to explore the undiscovered nuances of legal profession
and to engage in setting new standards in legal education.

.. image:: image035.jpg

.. important::

	**STUDENTS SUPPORT AND PROGRESSION**

	Each School has an efficient and competent system for student support
	and mentoring to provide academic, career and emotional counseling to
	the students. Students are supported through mentoring in academic
	studies, sports and cultural activities. They are guided for the
	development of their soft-skills and communication skills. They are
	counseled to develop professional competitiveness as well as develop
	ethics, human values, sense of social responsibility and environmental
	consciousness. Students are encouraged to participate in activities for
	social and community services. GBU also has a very strong program for
	counseling, soft skills development, career-path-identification of the
	students.

	The University has facilities for the differently-abled students like
	ramps and other basic facilities in all Schools/ Hostels and other
	premises. The University is very sensitive to the issues of gender
	equality. The University has ‘Gender Sensitivity Policy’. Students are
	encouraged to maintain gender discrimination free environment. Street
	plays related to this issue are enacted in the campus every year by
	student cultural groups. Also talks are organized for encouraging
	students to make campus a safe place for every student irrespective of
	gender and culture. The University also organizes various sessions to
	promote women empowerment. The University employs a no tolerance policy
	for issues related to sexual harassment.

.. image:: image041.jpg